Possession A Romance
A.S. Byatt
 
    When a writer calls his work a Romance, it need hardly be observed that he wishes
to claim a certain latitude, both as to its fashion and material, which he would not have
felt himself entitled to assume, had he professed to be writing a Novel. The latter form of
composition is presumed to aim at a very minute fidelity, not merely to the possible, but to
the probable and ordinary course of man’s experience. The former-while as a work of art,
it must rigidly subject itself to laws, and while it sins unpardonably so far as it may swerve
aside  from  the  truth  of  the  human  heart-has  fairly  a  right  to  present  that  truth  under
circumstances, to a great extent, of the writer’s own choosing or creation… . The point of
view in which this tale comes under the Romantic definition lies in the attempt to connect

a bygone time with the very present that is flitting away from us.
    -NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE
    Preface to The House of the Seven Gable
 
    And if at whiles the bubble, blown too thin,
    Seem nigh on bursting,-if you nearly see
    The real world through the false,-what do you see?
    Is the old so ruined? You find you’re in a flock
    O’ the youthful, earnest, passionate-genius, beauty,
    Rank and wealth also, if you care for these:
    And all depose their natural rights, hail you,
    (That’s me, sir) as their mate and yoke-fellow,
    Participate in Sludgehood-nay, grow mine,
    I veritably possess them-…
    
    And all this might be, may be, and with good help
    Of a little lying shall be: so Sludge lies!
    Why, he’s at worst your poet who sings how Greeks
    That never were, in Troy which never was,
    Did this or the other impossible great thing! …
    
    But why do I mount to poets? Take plain prose    Dealers in common sense, set these at work,
    What can they do without their helpful lies?
    Each states the law and fact and face o’ the thing
    Just as he’d have them, finds what he thinks fit,
    Is blind to what missuits him, just records
    What makes his case out, quite ignores the rest.
    It’s a History of the World, the Lizard Age,
    The Early Indians, the Old Country War,
    Jerome Napoleon, whatsoever you please.
    All as the author wants it. Such a scribe

    You pay and praise for putting life in stones,
    Fire into fog, making the past your world.
    There’s plenty of ‘How did you contrive to grasp
    The thread which led you through this labyrinth?
    How build such solid fabric out of air?
    How on so slight foundation found this tale,
    Biography, narrative?’ or, in other words,
    ‘How many lies did it require to make
    The portly truth you here present us with?’
-Robert Browning
from “Mr Sludge, ‘the Medium’ “
 
Chapter 1
 
    
    These things are there. The garden and the tree
    The serpent at its root, the fruit of gold
    The woman in the shadow of the boughs
    The running water and the grassy space.
    They are and were there. At the old world’s rim,
    In the Hesperidean grove, the fruit
    Glowed golden on eternal boughs, and there
    The dragon Ladon crisped his jewelled crest
    Scraped a gold claw and sharped a silver tooth
    And dozed and waited through eternity
    Until the tricksy hero Herakles
    Came to his dispossession and the theft.
    
- RANDOLPH HENRY ASH
from The Garden of Proserpina, 1861
 
The  book  was  thick  and  black  and  covered  with  dust.  Its  boards  were  bowed  and
creaking;  it  had  been  maltreated  in  its  own  time.  Its  spine  was  missing,  or,  rather,
protruded from amongst the leaves like a bulky marker. It was bandaged about and about
with dirty white tape, tied in a neat bow. The librarian handed it to Roland Mitchell, who
was  sitting  waiting  for  it  in  the  Reading  Room  of  the  London  Library.  It  had  been
exhumed from Locked Safe no. 5, where it usually stood between Pranks of Priapus and
The Grecian Way of Love. It was ten in the morning, one day in September 1986. Roland
had  the  small  single  table  he  liked  best,  behind  a  square  pillar,  with  the  clock  over  the
fireplace nevertheless in full view. To his right was a high sunny window, through which
you could see the high green leaves of St James’s Square.
The  London  Library  was  Roland’s  favourite  place.  It  was  shabby  but  civilised,  alive
with history but inhabited also by living poets and thinkers who could be found squatting
on the slotted metal floors of the stacks, or arguing pleasantly at the turning of the stair.
Here  Carlyle  had  come,  here  George  Eliot  had  progressed  through  the  bookshelves.
Roland  saw  her  black  silk  skirts,  her  velvet  trains,  sweeping  compressed  between  the
Fathers  of  the  Church,  and  heard  her  firm  foot  ring  on  metal  among  the  German  poets.
Here  Randolph  Henry  Ash  had  come,  cramming  his  elastic  mind  and  memory  with
unconsidered  trifles  from  History  and  Topography,  from  the  felicitous  alphabetical
conjunctions of Science and Miscellaneous- Dancing, Deaf and Dumb, Death, Dentistry,
Devil and Demonology, Distribution, Dogs, Domestic Servants, Dreams. In his day, works
on  Evolution  had  been  catalogued  under  Pre-Adamite  Man.  Roland  had  only  recently
discovered that the London Library possessed Ash’s own copy of Vico’s Principi di una
Scienza Nuova. Ash’s books were most regrettably scattered across Europe and America.
By  far  the  largest  single  gathering  was  of  course  in  the  Stant  Collection  at  Robert  Dale
Owen  University  in  New  Mexico,  where  Mortimer  Cropper  worked  on  his  monumental
edition of the  Complete  Correspondence  of  Randolph  Henry  Ash.  That  was  no  problem
nowadays,  books  travelled  the  aether  like  light  and  sound.  But  it  was  just  possible  that
Ash’s  own  Vico  had  marginalia  missed  even  by  the  indefatigable  Cropper.  And  Roland
was looking for sources for Ash’s Garden of Proserpina. And there was a pleasure to be
had from reading the sentences Ash had read, touched with his fingers, scanned with his
eyes.
It  was  immediately  clear  that  the  book  had  been  undisturbed  for  a  very  long  time,
perhaps  even  since  it  had  been  laid  to  rest.  The  librarian  fetched  a  checked  duster,  and
wiped away the dust, a black, thick, tenacious Victorian dust, a dust composed of smoke
and fog particles accumulated before the Clean Air acts. Roland undid the bindings. The
book sprang apart, like a box, disgorging leaf after leaf of faded paper, blue, cream, grey,
covered  with  rusty  writing,  the  brown  scratches  of  a  steel  nib.  Roland  recognised  the
handwriting with a shock of excitement. They appeared to be notes on Vico, written on the
backs  of  book-bills  and  letters.  The  librarian  observed  that  it  didn’t  look  as  though  they
had been touched before. Their edges, beyond the pages, were dyed soot-black, giving the
impression of the borders of mourning cards. They coincided precisely with their present
positions, edge of page and edge of stain.
Roland asked if it was in order for him to study these jottings. He gave his credentials;
he was part-time research assistant to Professor Blackadder, who had been editing Ash’s
Complete Works since 1951. The librarian tiptoed away to telephone: whilst he was gone,
the dead leaves continued a kind of rustling and shifting, enlivened by their release. Ash
had put them there. The librarian came back and said yes, it was quite in order, as long as

Roland was very careful not to disturb the sequence of the interleaved fragments until they
had  been  listed  and  described.  The  librarian  would  be  glad  to  know  of  any  important
discoveries Mr Michell might make.
All  this  was  over  by  ten-thirty.  For  the  next  half-hour  Roland  worked  haphazardly,
moving  backwards  and  forwards  in  the  Vico,  half  looking  for  Proserpina,  half  reading
Ash’s notes, which was not easy, since they were written in various languages, in Ash’s
annotating  hand,  which  was  reduced  to  a  minute  near-printing,  not  immediately
identifiable as the same as his more generous poetic or letter-writing hand.
At eleven he found what he thought was the relevant passage in Vico. Vico had looked
for historical fact in the poetic metaphors of myth and legend; this piecing together was
his “new science.” His Proserpine was the corn, the origin of commerce and community.
Randolph  Henry  Ash’s  Proserpine  had  been  seen  as  a  Victorian  reflection  of  religious
doubt,  a  meditation  on  the  myths  of  resurrection.  Lord  Leighton  had  painted  her,
distraught  and  floating,  a  golden  figure  in  a  tunnel  of  darkness.  Blackadder  had  a  belief
that  she  represented,  for  Randolph  Ash,  a  personification  of  history  itself  in  its  early
mythical days. (Ash had also written a poem about Gibbon and one about the Venerable
Bede, historians of greatly differing kinds. Blackadder had written an article on R. H. Ash
and relative historiography.)
Roland compared Ash’s text with the translation, and copied parts onto an index card.
He had two boxes of these, tomato-red and an intense grassy green, with springy plastic
hinges that popped in the library silence.
Ears  of  grain  were  called  apples  of  gold,  which  must  have  been  the  first  gold  in  the
world  while  metallic  gold  was  unknown…  So  the  golden  apple  which  Hercules  first
brought  back  or  gathered  from  Hesperia  must  have  been  grain;  and  the  Gallic  Hercules
with  links  of  this  gold,  that  issue  from  his  mouth,  chains  men  by  the  ears:  something
which will later be discovered as a myth concerning the fields. Hence Hercules remained
the Deity to propitiate in order to find treasures, whose god was Dis (identical with Pluto)
who carries off Proserpine (another name for Ceres or grain) to the underworld described
by the poets, according to whom its first name was Styx, its second the land of the dead,
its  third  the  depth  of  furrows…  It  was  of  this  golden  apple  that  Virgil,  most  learned  in
heroic antiquities, made the golden bough Aeneas carries into the Inferno or Underworld.
Randolph  Henry  Ash’s  Proserpina,  “gold-skinned  in  the  gloom,”  was  also  “graingolden.”  Also  “bound  with  golden  links”  which  might  have  been  jewellery  or  chains.
Roland  wrote  neat  cross-references  under  the  headings  of  grain,  apples,  chain,  treasure.
Folded into the page of Vico on which the passage appeared was a bill for candles on the
back  of  which  Ash  had  written:  “The  individual  appears  for  an  instant,  joins  the
community of thought, modifies it and dies; but the species, that dies not, reaps the fruit of
his  ephemeral  existence.”  Roland  copied  this  out  and  made  another  card,  on  which  he
interrogated himself: “Query?  Is  this  a  quotation  or  is  it  Ash  himself?  Is  Proserpina  the
Species? A very C19 idea. Or is she the individual? When did he put these papers in here?
Are  they  pre-  or  post-The  Origin  of  Species?  Not  conclusive  anyway-  he  cd  have  been
interested in Development generally…”
That  was  eleven-fifteen.  The  clock  ticked,  motes  of  dust  danced  in  sunlight,  Roland

meditated on the tiresome and bewitching endlessness of the quest for knowledge. Here he
sat, recuperating a dead man’s reading, timing his exploration by the library clock and the
faint constriction of his belly. (Coffee is not to be had in the London Library.) He would
have  to  show  all  this  new  treasure-trove  to  Blackadder,  who  would  be  both  elated  and
grumpy, who would anyway be pleased that it was locked away in Safe 5 and not spirited
away  to  Robert  Dale  Owen  University  in  Harmony  City,  with  so  much  else.  He  was
reluctant to tell Blackadder. He enjoyed possessing his knowledge on his own. Proserpina
was  between  pages  288  and  289.  Under  page  300  lay  two  folded  complete  sheets  of
writing  paper.  Roland  opened  these  delicately.  They  were  both  letters  in  Ash’s  flowing
hand,  both  headed  with  his  Great  Russell  Street  address  and  dated,  June  21st.  No  year.
Both began “Dear Madam,” and both were unsigned. One was considerably shorter than
the other.
 
Dear Madam,
Since  our  extraordinary  conversation  I  have  thought  of  nothing  else.  It  has  not  often
been  given  to  me  as  a  poet,  it  is  perhaps  not  often  given  to  human  beings,  to  find  such
ready  sympathy,  such  wit  and  judgment  together.  I  write  with  a  strong  sense  of  the
necessity of continuing our talk, and without premeditation, under the impression that you
were  indeed  as  much  struck  as  I  was  by  our  quite  extraordinary  to  ask  if  it  would  be
possible for me to call on you, perhaps one day next week. Ifeel, I know with a certainty
that cannot be the result of folly or misapprehension, that you and I must speak again. I
know  you  go  out  in  company  very  little,  and  was  the  more  fortunate  that  dear  Crabb
managed  to  entice  you  to  his  breakfast  table.  To  think  that  amongst  the  babble
ofundergraduate humour and through all Crabb’s well-wrought anecdotes, even including
the Bust, we were able to say so much, that was significant, simply to each other. I cannot
surely be alone in feeling
 
The second one ran:
 
Dear Madam,
Since  our  pleasant  and  unexpected  conversation  I  have  thought  of  little  else.  Is  there
any way in which it can be resumed, more privately and at more leisure? I know you go
out in company very little, and was the more fortunate that dear Crabb managed to entice
you to his breakfast table. How much I owe to his continuing good health, that he should
feel able and eager, at eighty-two years of age, to entertain poets and undergraduates and
mathematical professors and political thinkers so early in the day, and to tell the anecdote
of  the  Bust  with  his  habitual  fervour  without  too  much  delaying  the  advent  of  buttered
toast.
Did you not find it as strange as I did, that we should so immediately understand each
other so well? For we did understand each other uncommonly well, did we not? Or is this
perhaps  a  product  of  the  over-excited  brain  of  a  middle-aged  and  somewhat  disparaged
poet, when hefnds that his ignored, his arcane, his deviously perspicuous meanings, which
he thought not meanings, since no one appeared able to understand them, had after all one

clear-eyed  and  amused  reader  and  judge?  What  you  said  of  Alexander  Selkirk’s
monologue,  the  good  sense  you  made  of  the  ramblings  of  my  John  Bunyan,  your
understanding  of  the  passion  of  Inez  de  Castro…  gruesomely  resurrecta…  but  that  is
enough  of  my  egoistical  mutter,  and  of  those  of  my  personae,  who  are  not,  as  you  so
rightly  remarked,  my  masks.  I  would  not  have  you  think  that  I  do  not  recognise  the
superiority of your own fine ear and finer taste. I am convinced that you must undertake
that  grand  Fairy  Topic  -  you  will  make  something  highly  strange  and  original  of  it.  In
connection with that, I wonder if you have thought of Vico’s history of the primitive races
-  of  his  idea  that  the  ancient  gods  and  later  heroes  are  personifications  of  the  fates  and
aspirations of the people rising in figures from the common mind? Something here might
be made of your Fairy’s legendary rootedness in veritable castles and genuine agricultural
reform - one of the queerest aspects of her story, to a modern mind. But I run on again;
assuredly you have determined on your own best ways of presenting the topic, you who
are so wise and learned in your retirement.
I  cannot  but  feel,  though  it  may  be  an  illusion  induced  by  the  delectable  drug  of
understanding,  that  you  must  in  some  way  share  my  eagerness  that  further  conversation
could  be  mutually  profitable  that  we  must  meet.  I  cannot  do  not  think  I  am  can  be
mistaken  in  my  belief  that  our  meeting  was  also  important  interesting  to  you,  and  that
however much you may value your seclusion
I know that you came only to honour dear Crabb, at a small informal party, because he
had  been  of  assistance  to  your  illustrious  Father,  and  valued  his  work  at  a  time  when  it
meant a great deal to him. But you did come out, so I may hope that you can be induced to
vary your quiet days with
I am sure you understand
 
Roland  was  first  profoundly  shocked  by  these  writings,  and  then,  in  his  scholarly
capacity,  thrilled.  His  mind  busied  itself  automatically  with  dating  and  placing  this
unachieved  dialogue  with  an  unidentified  woman.  There  was  no  year  on  the  letters,  but
they must necessarily come after the publication of Ash’s dramatic poems, Gods, Men and
Heroes,  which  had  appeared  in  1856  and  had  not,  contrary  to  Ash’s  hopes  and  perhaps
expectations,  found  favour  with  the  reviewers,  who  had  declared  his  verses  obscure,  his
tastes  perverse  and  his  people  extravagant  and  improbable.  “The  Solitary  Thoughts  of
Alexander  Selkirk”  was  one  of  those  poems,  the  musings  of  the  castaway  sailor  on  his
island. So was “The Tinker’s Grace,” purporting to be Bunyan’s prison musings on Divine
Grace, and so was Pedro of Portugal’s rapt and bizarre declaration of love, in 1356, for the
embalmed  corpse  of  his  murdered  wife,  Inez  de  Castro,  who  swayed  beside  him  on  his
travels,  leather-brown  and  skeletal,  crowned  with  lace  and  gold  circlet,  hung  about  with
chains  of  diamonds  and  pearls,  her  bone-fingers  fantastically  ringed.  Ash  liked  his
characters at or over the edge of madness, constructing systems of belief and survival from
the  fragments  of  experience  available  to  them.  It  would  be  possible,  Roland  thought,  to
identify the breakfast party, which must have been one of Crabb Robinson’s later efforts to
provide stimulating conversation for the students of the new London University.
Crabb  Robinson’s  papers  were  kept  in  Dr  Williams’s  Library  in  Gordon  Square,
originally  designed  as  University  Hall,  supported  by  Robinson  as  a  place  in  which  lay

students could experience collegiate university life. It would, it must, be easy to check in
Robinson’s diary an occasion on which Ash had breakfasted at 30 Russell Square with a
professor  of  mathematics,  a  political  thinker  (Bagehot?)  and  a  reclusive  lady  who  knew
about, who wrote, or proposed to write, poetry.
He had no idea who she might be. Christina Rossetti? He thought not. He was not sure
that  Miss  Rossetti  would  have  approved  of  Ash’s  theology,  or  of  his  sexual  psychology.
He could not identify the Fairy Topic, either, and this gave him a not uncommon sensation
of  his  own  huge  ignorance,  a  grey  mist,  in  which  floated  or  could  be  discerned  odd
glimpses of solid objects, odd bits of glitter of domes or shadows of roofs in the gloom.
Had the correspondence continued? If it had, where was it, what jewels of information
about Ash’s ‘ignored, arcane, deviously perspicuous meanings’ might not be revealed by
it? Scholarship might have to reassess all sorts of certainties. On the other hand, had the
correspondence  ever  in  fact  started?  Or  had  Ash  finally  floundered  in  his  inability  to
express  his  sense  of  urgency?  It  was  this  urgency  above  all  that  moved  and  shocked
Roland. He thought he knew Ash fairly well, as well as anyone might know a man whose
life seemed to be all in his mind, who lived a quiet and exemplary married life for forty
years, whose correspondence was voluminous indeed, but guarded, courteous and not of
the most lively. Roland liked that in Randolph Henry Ash. He was excited by the ferocious
vitality  and  darting  breadth  of  reference  of  the  work,  and  secretly,  personally,  he  was
rather pleased that all this had been achieved out of so peaceable, so unruffled a private
existence.
He  read  the  letters  again.  Had  a  final  draft  been  posted?  Or  had  the  impulse  died  or
been rebuffed? Roland was seized by a strange and uncharacteristic impulse of his own. It
was suddenly quite impossible to put these living words back into page 300 of Vico and
return  them  to  Safe  5.  He  looked  about  him:  no  one  was  looking:  he  slipped  the  letters
between  the  leaves  of  his  own  copy  of  the  Oxford  Selected  Ash,  which  he  was  never
without.  Then  he  returned  to  the  Vico  annotations,  transferring  the  most  interesting
methodically to his card index, until the clanging bell descended the stairwell, signifying
the end of study. He had forgotten about his lunch.
When  he  left,  with  his  green  and  tomato  boxes  heaped  on  his  Selected  Ash,  they
nodded  affably  from  behind  the  issue  desk.  They  were  used  to  him.  There  were  notices
about mutilation of volumes, about theft, with which he quite failed to associate himself.
He left the building as usual, his battered and bulging briefcase under his arm. He climbed
on a 14 bus in Piccadilly, and went upstairs, clutching his booty. Between Piccadilly and
Putney,  where  he  lived  in  the  basement  of  a  decaying  Victorian  house,  he  progressed
through his usual states of somnolence, sick juddering wakefulness, and increasing worry
about Val.
 
Chapter 2
 
    A man is the history of his breaths and thoughts, acts, atoms and wounds, love,
indifference  and  dislike;  also  of  his  race  and  nation,  the  soil  that  fed  him  and  his
forebears, the stones and sands of his familiar places, long-silenced battles and struggles

of conscience, of the smiles of girls and the slow utterance of old women, of accidents and
the  gradual  action  of  inexorable  law,  of  all  this  and  something  else  too,  a  single  flame
which in every way obeys the laws that pertain to Fire itself, and yet is lit and put out from
one moment to the next, and can never be relumed in the whole waste of time to come.
So Randolph Henry Ash, ca 1840, when he was writing Ragnarôk, a poem in twelve
books,  which  some  saw  as  a  Christianising  of  the  Norse  myth  and  some  trounced  as
atheistic and diabolically despairing. It mattered to Randolph Ash what a man was, though
he could, without undue disturbance, have written that general pantechnicon of a sentence
using other terms, phrases and rhythms and have come in the end to the same satisfactory
evasive metaphor. Or so Roland thought, trained in the post-structuralist deconstruction of
the subject. If he had been asked what Roland Michell was, he would have had to give a
very different answer.
In 1986 he was twenty-nine, a graduate of Prince Albert College, London (1978) and a
PhD  of  the  same  university  (1985).  His  doctoral  dissertation  was  entitled  History,
Historians and Poetry? A Study of the Presentation of Historical ‘Evidence’ in the Poems
of  Randolph  Henry  Ash.  He  had  written  it  under  the  supervision  of  James  Black-adder,
which  had  been  a  discouraging  experience.  Blackadder  was  discouraged  and  liked  to
discourage others. (He was also a stringent scholar.) Roland was now employed, parttime,
in what was known as Blackadder’s Ash Factory (why not Ashram? Val had said), which
operated  from  the  British  Museum,  to  which  Ash’s  wife,  Ellen,  had  given  many  of  the
manuscripts  of  his  poems,  when  he  died.  The  Ash  Factory  was  funded  by  a  small  grant
from  London  University  and  a  much  larger  one  from  the  Newsome  Foundation  in
Albuquerque,  a  charitable  trust  of  which  Mortimer  Cropper  was  a  trustee.  This  might
appear to indicate that Blackadder and Cropper worked harmoniously together on behalf
of Ash. This would be a misconception. Blackadder believed Cropper to have designs on
those manuscripts lodged with, but not owned by, the British Library, and to be worming
his way into the confidence and goodwill of the owners by displays of munificence and
helpfulness.  Blackadder,  a  Scot,  believed  British  writings  should  stay  in  Britain  and  be
studied by the British. It may seem odd to begin a description of Roland Michell with an
excursus  into  the  complicated  relations  of  Blackadder,  Cropper  and  Ash,  but  it  was  in
these  terms  that  Roland  most  frequently  thought  of  himself.  When  he  did  not  think  in
terms of Val.
He thought of himself as a latecomer. He had arrived too late for things that were still in
the air but vanished, the whole ferment and brightness and journeyings and youth of the
1960s,  the  blissful  dawn  of  what  he  and  his  contemporaries  saw  as  a  pretty  blank  day.
Through the psychedelic years he was a schoolboy in a depressed Lancashire cotton town,
untouched alike by Liverpool noise and London turmoil. His father was a minor official in
the  County  Council.  His  mother  was  a  disappointed  English  graduate.  He  thought  of
himself  as  though  he  were  an  application  form,  for  a  job,  a  degree,  a  life,  but  when  he
thought  of  his  mother,  the  adjective  would  not  be  expurgated.  She  was  disappointed.  In
herself, in his father, in him. The wrath of her disappointment had been the instrument of
his  education,  which  had  taken  place  in  a  perpetual  rush  from  site  to  site  of  a  hastily
amalgamated three-school comprehensive, the Aneurin Bevan school, combining Glasdale
Old Grammar School, St Thomas à Becket’s C of E Secondary School and the Clothiers’
Guild  Technical  Modern  School.  His  mother  had  drunk  too  much  stout,  “gone  up  the

school,” and had him transferred from metal work to Latin, from Civic Studies to French;
she had paid a maths coach with the earnings of a paper-round she had sent him out on.
And  so  he  had  acquired  an  old-fashioned  classical  education,  with  gaps  where  teachers
had been made redundant or classroom chaos had reigned. He had done what was hoped
of  him,  always,  had  four  A’s  at  A  Level,  a  First,  a  PhD.  He  was  now  essentially
unemployed,  scraping  a  living  on  part-time  tutoring,  dogsbodying  for  Blackadder  and
some restaurant dishwashing. In the expansive 1960s he would have advanced rapidly and
involuntarily, but now he saw himself as a failure and felt vaguely responsible for this. He
was  a  compact,  clearcut  man,  with  precise  features,  a  lot  of  very  soft  black  hair,  and
thoughtful dark brown eyes. He had a look of wariness, which could change when he felt
relaxed  or  happy,  which  was  not  often  in  these  difficult  days,  into  a  smile  of  amused
friendliness and pleasure which aroused feelings of warmth, and something more, in many
women. He was generally unaware of these feelings, since he paid little attention to what
people thought about him, which was part of his attraction. Val called him Mole, which he
disliked. He had never told her so.
He lived with Val, whom he had met at a Freshers’ tea party in the Student Union when
he was eighteen. He believed now, though this belief may have been a mythic smoothing
of his memory, that Val was the first person his undergraduate self had spoken to, socially
that  was,  not  officially.  He  had  liked  the  look  of  her,  he  remembered,  a  soft,  brown
uncertain  look.  She  had  been  standing  on  her  own,  holding  a  teacup  in  front  of  her,  not
looking about her, but rather fixedly out of the window, as though she expected no one to
approach and invited no one. She projected a sort of calm, a lack of strife, and so he went
over to join her. And since then they had never not been together. They signed up for the
same  courses  and  joined  the  same  societies;  they  sat  together  in  seminars  and  went
together  to  the  National  Film  Theatre;  they  had  sex  together  and  moved  together  into  a
one-roomed flat in their second year. They lived frugally off a diet of porridge and lentils
and  beans  and  yogurt;  they  drank  a  little  beer,  making  it  spin  out;  they  shared  bookbuying; they were both entirely confined to their grants, which did not go far in London,
and could not be supplemented with holiday earnings, for these had vanished with the oil
crisis.  Val  had  been,  Roland  was  sure,  partly  responsible  for  his  First.  (Along  with  his
mother and Randolph Henry Ash.) She simply expected it of him, she made him always
say  what  he  thought,  she  argued  points,  she  worried  constantly  about  whether  she  was,
whether  they  both  were,  working  hard  enough.  They  quarrelled  hardly  at  all  and  when
they did it was almost always because Roland expressed concern about Val’s reserve with
the world in general, her refusal to advance opinions in class and, later, even to him. In the
early days she had had lots of quiet opinions, he remembered, which she had offered him,
shyly slyly, couched as a kind of invitation or bait. There had been poems she had liked.
Once she had sat up naked in his dark digs and recited Robert Graves:
 
    She tells her love while half asleep,
    In the dark hours,
    With half-words whispered low:
    As Earth stirs in her winter sleep

    And puts out grass and flowers
    Despite the snow,
    Despite the falling snow.
 
She had a rough voice gentled, between London and Liverpool, as the group voice was.
When Roland began to speak, after this, she put a hand over his mouth, which was as well,
for he had nothing to say. Later, Roland noticed, as he himself had his successes, Val said
less and less, and when she argued, offered him increasingly his own ideas, sometimes the
reverse  side  of  the  knitting,  but  essentially  his.  She  even  wrote  her  Required  Essay  on
“Male  Ventriloquism:  The  Women  of  Randolph  Henry  Ash.”  Roland  did  not  want  this.
When he suggested that she should strike out on her own, make herself noticed, speak up,
she  accused  him  of  “taunting”  her.  When  he  asked,  what  did  she  mean,  “taunting,”  she
resorted, as she always did when they argued, to silence. Since silence was also Roland’s
only  form  of  aggression,  they  would  continue  in  this  way  for  days,  or,  one  terrible  time
when  Roland  directly  criticised  “Male  Ventriloquism,”  for  weeks.  And  then  the  fraught
silence  would  modulate  into  conciliatory  monosyllable,  and  back  to  their  peaceful  coexistence. When Finals came, Roland did steadily and predictably well. Val’s papers were
bland  and  minimal,  in  large  confident  handwriting,  well  laid  out.  “Male  Ventriloquism”
was  judged  to  be  good  work  and  discounted  by  the  examiners  as  probably  largely  by
Roland, which was doubly unjust, since he had refused to look at it, and did not agree with
its central proposition, which was that Randolph Henry Ash neither liked nor understood
women, that his female speakers were constructs of his own fear and aggression, that even
the  poem-cycle,  Ask  to  Embla,  was  the  work  not  of  love  but  of  narcissism,  the  poet
addressing  his  Anima.  (No  biographical  critic  had  ever  satisfactorily  identified  Embla.)
Val did very badly. Roland had supposed she had expected this, but it became dreadfully
obvious that she had not. There were tears, night-long, choked, whimpering tears, and the
first tantrum.
Val left him for the first time since they set up house, and went briefly “home.” Home
was  Croydon,  where  she  lived  with  her  divorced  mother  in  a  council  flat,  supported  by
social security, supplemented occasionally by haphazard maintenance payments from her
father, who was in the Merchant Navy and had not been seen since Val was five. Val had
never,  during  their  time  together,  proposed  to  Roland  that  they  visit  her  mother,  though
Roland had twice taken her to Glasdale, where she had helped his father wash up, and had
taken his mother’s jeering deflation of their way of life in her stride, telling him, “Don’t
worry, Mole. I’ve seen it all before. Only mine drinks. If you lit a match in our kitchen,
it’d go up with a roar.”
When Val was gone, Roland realised, with a shock like a religious conversion, that he
did not want their way of life to go on. He rolled over, and spread his loosened limbs in
the  bed,  he  opened  windows,  he  went  to  the  Tate  Gallery  alone  and  looked  at  the
dissolving blue and gold air of Turner’s Norham Castle. He cooked a pheasant for his rival
in the departmental rat-race, Fergus Wolff, which was exciting and civilised, although the
pheasant was tough and full of shot. He made plans, which were not plans, but visions of
solitary activity and free watchfulness, things he had never had. After a week, Val came
back, tearful and shaky, and declared that she meant at least to earn her living, and would

take a course in shorthand-typing.
“At least you want me,” she told Roland, her face damp and glistening. “I don’t know
why you should want me, I’m no good, but you do.”
“Of course I do,” Roland had said. “Of course.”
When his DES grant ran out, Val became the breadwinner, whilst he finished his PhD.
She acquired an IBM golfball typewriter and did academic typing at home in the evenings
and various well-paid temping jobs during the day. She worked in the City and in teaching
hospitals, in shipping firms and art galleries. She resisted pressure to specialise. She would
not be drawn out to talk about her work, to which she almost never referred without the
adjective “menial.”
“I  must  do  just  a  few  more  menial  things  before  I  go  to  bed”  or,  more  oddly,  “I  was
nearly run over on my menial way this morning.” Her voice acquired a jeering note, not
unfamiliar  to  Roland,  who  wondered  for  the  first  time  what  his  mother  had  been  like
before her disappointment, which in her case was his father and to some extent himself.
The typewriter clashed and harried him at night, never rhythmical enough to be ignored.
There were now two Vais. One sat silently at home in old jeans and unevenly hanging
long crêpey shirts, splashed with murky black and purple flowers. This one had lustreless
brown  hair,  very  straight,  hanging  about  a  pale,  underground  face.  Just  sometimes,  this
one had crimson nails, left over from the other, who wore a tight black skirt and a black
jacket with padded shoulders over a pink silk shirt and was carefully made up with pink
and  brown  eyeshadow,  brushed  blusher  along  the  cheekbone  and  plummy  lips.  This
mournfully bright menial Val wore high heels and a black beret. She had beautiful ankles,
invisible  under  the  domestic  jeans.  Her  hair  was  rolled  into  a  passable  pageboy  and
sometimes  tied  with  a  black  ribbon.  She  stopped  short  of  perfume.  She  was  not
constructed  to  be  attractive.  Roland  half  wished  that  she  was,  that  a  merchant  banker
would take her out to dinner, or a shady solicitor to the Playboy Club. He hated himself
for  these  demeaning  fantasies,  and  was  reasonably  afraid  that  she  might  suspect  he
nourished them.
If he could get a job, it might be easier to initiate some change. He made applications
and was regularly turned down. When one came up in his own department there were six
hundred  applications.  Roland  was  interviewed,  out  of  courtesy  he  decided,  but  the  job
went  to  Fergus  Wolff,  whose  track  record  was  less  consistent,  who  could  be  brilliant  or
bathetic,  but  never  dull  and  right,  who  was  loved  by  his  teachers,  whom  he  exasperated
and entranced, where Roland excited no emotion more passionate than solid approbation.
Fergus was also in the right field, which was literary theory. Val was more indignant than
Roland about this event, and her indignation upset him as much as his own failure, for he
liked  Fergus  and  wanted  to  be  able  to  go  on  liking  him.  Val  found  one  of  her  insisting
words  for  Fergus  too,  one  which  was  askew  and  inaccurate.  “That  pretentious  blond
bombshell”  she  said  of  him.  “That  pretentious  sexpot.”  She  liked  to  use  sexist  wolfwhistle  words  as  a  kind  of  boomerang.  This  embarrassed  Roland,  since  Fergus
transcended any such terminology; he was indeed blond, and he was indeed sexually very
successful, and that was an end to it. He came to no more meals, and Roland feared Fergus
thought this was a function of his, Roland’s, resentment.

When he got home that evening he could smell that Val was in a mood. The basement
was full of the sharp warmth of frying onions, which meant she was cooking something
complicated.  When  she  was  not  in  a  mood,  when  she  was  apathetic,  she  opened  tins  or
boiled  eggs,  or  at  most  dressed  an  avocado.  When  she  was  either  very  cheerful  or  very
angry,  she  cooked.  She  stood  at  the  sink,  chopping  courgettes  and  aubergines,  when  he
came in, and did not look up, so he surmised that the mood was bad. He put down his bag
quietly. They had a cavernous basement room, which they had painted apricot and white
to  cheer  it  up;  it  was  furnished  with  a  double  divan,  two  very  old  arm-chairs  with
curvaceous rolled arms and head-rests, plum and plushy and dusty, a second-hand stainedoak  office  desk,  where  Roland  worked,  and  a  newer  varnished  beech  desk,  where  the
typewriter  sat.  These  were  back  to  back  on  the  long  side-walls  each  with  their  Habitat
anglepoise,  Roland’s  black,  Val’s  rose-pink.  On  the  back  wall  were  bookcases,  made  of
bricks  and  planks,  sagging  under  standard  texts,  most  of  them  jointly  owned,  some
duplicated.  They  had  put  up  various  posters:  a  British  Museum  poster  from  the  Koran,
intricate and geometric, a Tate advertisement for a Turner exhibition.
Roland possessed three images of Randolph Henry Ash. One, a photograph of the death
mask, which was one of the central pieces in the Stant Collection of Harmony City, stood
on  his  desk.  There  was  a  puzzle  about  how  this  bleak,  broad-browed  carved  head  had
come into existence, since there also existed a photograph of the poet in his last sleep, still
patriarchally bearded. Who had shaved him, when? Roland had wondered, and Mortimer
Cropper had asked in his biography, The Great Ventriloquist, without finding an answer.
His  other  two  portraits  were  photographic  copies,  made  to  order,  of  the  two  portraits  of
Ash  in  the  National  Portrait  Gallery.  Val  had  banished  these  to  the  dark  of  the  hall.  She
said  she  did  not  want  him  staring  at  her,  she  wanted  a  bit  of  her  life  to  herself,  without
having to share it with Randolph Ash.
In the dark hall the pictures were difficult to see. One was by Manet and one was by G.
F. Watts. The Manet had been painted when the painter was in England in 1867, and had
some things in common with his portrait of Zola. He had shown Ash, whom he had met
previously in Paris, sitting at his desk, in a three-quarters profile, in a carved mahogany
chair. Behind him was a kind of triptych with ferny foliage, to the left and right, enclosing
a  watery  space  in  which  rosy  and  silver  fish  shone  between  pondweeds.  The  effect  was
partly to set the poet amongst the roots of a wood or forest, until, as Mortimer Cropper had
pointed  out,  one  realised  that  the  background  was  one  of  those  compartmentalised
Wardian cases, in which the Victorians grew plants in controlled environments, or created
self-sustaining ponds, in order to study the physiology of plants and fishes. Manet’s Ash
was dark, powerful, with deepset eyes under a strong brow, a vigorous beard and a look of
confident private amusement. He looked watchful and intelligent, not ready to move in a
hurry. In front of him on his desk were disposed various objects, an elegant and masterly
still life to complement the strong head and the ambivalent natural growths. There was a
heap  of  rough  geological  specimens,  including  two  almost  spherical  stones,  a  little  like
cannon  balls,  one  black  and  one  a  sulphurous  yellow,  some  ammonites  and  trilobites,  a
large crystal ball, a green glass inkwell, the articulated skeleton of a cat, a heap of books,
two of which could be seen to be the Divina Commedia and Faust, and an hourglass in a
wooden frame. Of these, the inkwell, the crystal ball, the hourglass, the two named books
and  two  of  the  others,  which  had  been  painstakingly  identified  as  Quixote  and  Lyell’s

Geology,  were  now  in  the  Stant  Collection,  where  a  room  had  been  arranged,  Wardian
cases  and  all,  to  resemble  the  Manet  setting.  The  chair  had  also  been  collected,  and  the
desk itself.
The portrait by Watts was mistier and less authoritative. It had been painted in 1876 and
showed  an  older  and  more  ethereal  poet,  his  head  rising,  as  is  common  with  Watts  ‘s
portraits,  from  a  vague  dark  column  of  a  body  into  a  spiritual  light.  There  was  a
background but it had darkened. In the original portrait it could be vaguely made out as a
kind  of  craggy  wild  place;  in  this  photographic  reproduction  it  was  no  more  than
thickenings and glimmerings in the black. The important features of this image were the
eyes,  which  were  large  and  gleaming,  and  the  beard,  a  riverful  of  silvers  and  creams,
whites and blue-greys, channels and forks resembling da Vinci’s turbulences, the apparent
source of light. Even in the photograph, it shone. Roland considered Randolph Ash, who
had always looked so self-possessed, so all-of-a-piece. The look of amusement Manet had
captured now took on an almost teasing aspect, a challenge: “So you think you know me?”
And  the  urgency  of  the  unfinished  letters  gave  a  new  energy  to  the  solid  dark  body,  as
though it might after all be capable of violent movement. The known Ash shifted a little,
and Roland felt flickers of excitement of his own. A kind of readiness. A kind of fear.
At the end of the room the window opened onto a little yard, with steps to the garden,
which  was  visible  between  railings  in  the  upper  third  of  their  window.  Their  flat  was
described as a garden flat when they came to see it, which was the only occasion on which
they were asked to come into the garden, into which they were later told they had no right
of entry. They were not even allowed to attempt to grow things in tubs in their black area,
for  reasons  vague  but  peremptory,  put  forward  by  their  landlady,  an  octogenarian  Mrs
Irving, who inhabited the three floors above them in a rank civet fug amongst unnumbered
cats,  and  who  kept  the  garden  as  bright  and  wholesome  and  well  ordered  as  her  livingroom was sparse and decomposing. She had enticed them in like an old witch, Val said, by
talking volubly to them in the garden about the quietness of the place, giving them each a
small,  gold,  furry  apricot  from  the  espaliered  trees  along  the  curving  brick  wall.  The
garden was long, thin, bowery, with sunny spots of grass, surrounded by little box hedges,
its  air  full  of  roses,  swarthy  damask,  thick  ivory,  floating  pink,  its  borders  restraining
fantastic  striped  and  spotted  lilies,  curling  bronze  and  gold,  bold  and  hot  and  rich.  And
forbidden.  But  they  did  not  know  that  in  the  beginning,  as  Mrs  Irving  expatiated  in  her
cracked and gracious voice on the high brick wall which dated from the Civil War, when it
had formed one boundary of General Fairfax’s lands. Randolph Henry Ash had written a
poem purporting to be spoken by a Digger in Putney. He had even come there to look at
the river at low tide, it was in Ellen Ash’s Journal, they had brought a picnic of chicken
and  parsley  pie.  That  fact,  and  the  conjunction  of  Marvell’s  patron,  Fairfax,  with  the
existence of the walled garden of fruit and flowers were enough to tempt Roland and Val
into the garden flat, with its prohibited view.
In spring their window was lit from above by the yellow glow of a thick row of bright
daffodils.  Tendrils  of  Virginia  creeper  crept  down  as  far  as  the  window-frame,  and
progressed on little circular suckers across the glass, at huge vegetable speed. Swathes of
jasmine,  loose  from  a  prolifically  flowering  specimen  on  the  edge  of  the  house,
occasionally fell over their railing, with their sweet scent, before Mrs Irving, clothed in her
gardening  gear  of  Wellingtons  and  apron  over  the  seated  and  threadbare  tweed  suit  in

which she had first enticed them in, came and bound these back. Roland had once asked
her if he could help in the garden, in exchange for the right to sit there sometimes. He had
been  told  that  he  didn’t  know  the  first  thing  about  it,  that  the  young  were  all  the  same,
destructive  and  careless,  that  Mrs  Irving  set  a  value  on  her  privacy.  “You  would  think,”
said  Val,  “that  the  cats  would  do  the  garden  no  good.”  That  was  before  they  found  the
patches of damp on their own kitchen and bathroom ceilings, which, when touched with a
finger, smelled unmistakably of cat-piss. The cats too, were under prohibition, confined to
quarters.  Roland  thought  they  ought  to  look  for  somewhere  else,  but  held  back  from
proposing  it,  because  he  was  not  the  breadwinner,  and  because  he  didn’t  want  to  do
anything so decisive, in terms of himself and Val.
 
Val  put  before  him  grilled  marinated  lamb,  ratatouille  and  hot  Greek  bread.  He  said,
“Shall I get a bottle of wine?” and Val said, disagreeably and truthfully, “You should have
thought  of  that  some  time  back;  it’ll  all  go  cold.”  They  ate  at  a  card-table,  which  they
unfolded and folded again, after.
“I made an amazing discovery today,” he told her.
“Oh?”
“I was in the London Library. They’ve got R. H. Ash’s Vico. His own copy. They keep
it in the safe. I had it brought up and it was absolutely bursting at the seams with his own
notes, all tucked in, on the backs of bills and things. And I’m ninety per cent sure no one
had looked at them, ever, not since he put them there, because all the edges were black and
the lines coincided…”
“How interesting.” Flatly.
“It might change the face of scholarship. It could. They let me read them, they didn’t
take it away. I’m sure no one knew it was all there.”
“I expect they didn’t.”
“I’ll have to tell Blackadder. He’ll want to see how important it is, make sure Cropper
hasn’t been there…”
“I  expect  he  will,  yes.”  It  was  a  bad  mood.  “I’m  sorry,  Val,  I’m  sorry  to  bore  you.  It
does look exciting.”
“That depends what turns you on. We all have our little pleasures of different kinds, I
suppose.”
“I can write it up. An article. A solid discovery. Make me a better job prospect.”
“There  aren’t  any  jobs.”  She  added,  “And  if  there  are,  they  go  to  Fergus  Wolff.”  He
knew his Val: he had watched her honourably try to prevent herself from adding that last
remark.
“If you really think what I do is so unimportant…”
“You  do  what  turns  you  on,”  said  Val.  “Everyone  does,  if  they’re  lucky,  if  there  is
anything  that  turns  them  on.  You  have  this  thing  about  this  dead  man.  Who  had  a  thing
about dead people. That’s OK but not everyone is very bothered about all that. I see some

things,  from  my  menial  vantage  point.  Last  week,  when  I  was  in  that  ceramics  export
place, I found some photographs under a file in my boss’s desk. Things being done to little
boys. With chains and gags and-dirt- This week, ever so efficiently filing records for this
surgeon, I just happened to come across a sixteen-year-old who had his leg off last yearthey’re fitting him with an artificial one, it takes months, they’re incredibly slow-and it’s
started  up  for  certain  now  in  his  other  leg,  he  doesn’t  know,  but  I  know,  I  know  lots  of
things. None of them fit together, none of them makes any sense. There was a man who
went off to Amsterdam to buy some diamonds, I helped his secretary book his ticket, first
class, and his limousine, smooth as clockwork, and as he’s walking along a canal admiring
the housefronts someone stabs him in the back, destroys a kidney, gangrene sets in, now
he’s  dead.  Just  like  that.  Chaps  like  those  use  my  menial  services,  here  today,  gone
tomorrow. Randolph Henry Ash wrote long ago. Forgive me if I don’t care what he wrote
in his Vico.”
“Oh, Val, such horrible things, you never say-”
“Oh, it’s all very interesting, my menial keyhole observations, make no mistake. Just it
doesn’t make sense and it leaves me nowhere. I suppose I envy you, piecing together old
Ash’s  world-picture.  Only  where  does  that  leave  you,  old  Mole?  What’s  your  worldpicture? And how are you ever going to afford to get us away from dripping cat-piss and
being on top of each other?’*
Something had upset her, Roland reasonably deduced. Something that had caused her to
use the phrase “turn you on” several times, which was uncharacteristic. Perhaps someone
had grabbed her. Or had not done so. No, that was unworthy. Anger and petulance did turn
her on, he knew. He knew more than was quite good for him about Val. He went across
and stroked the nape of her neck, and she sniffed and stiffened and then relaxed. After a
bit, they moved over to the bed.
He  had  not  told  her,  and  could  not  tell  her,  about  his  secret  theft.  Late  that  night,  he
looked  at  the  letters  again,  in  the  bathroom.  “Dear  Madam,  Since  our  extraordinary
conversation I have thought of nothing else.”
“Dear Madam, Since our pleasant and unexpected conversation I have thought of little
else.” Urgent, unfinished. Shocking. Roland had never been much interested in Randolph
Henry Ash’s vanished body; he did not spend time visiting his house in Russell Street, or
sitting  where  he  had  sat,  on  stone  garden  seats;  that  was  Cropper’s  style.  What  Roland
liked was his knowledge of the movements of Ash’s mind, stalked through the twists and
turns  of  his  syntax,  suddenly  sharp  and  clear  in  an  unexpected  epithet.  But  these  dead
letters  troubled  him,  physically  even,  because  they  were  only  beginnings.  He  did  not
imagine Randolph Henry Ash, his pen moving rapidly across the paper, but he did have
the  thought  of  the  pads  of  the  long-dead  fingers  that  had  held  and  folded  these  halfcovered sheets, before preserving them in the book, instead of jettisoning them. Who? He
must try to find out.
 
Chapter 3
 

    
    In this dim place
    The creeping Nidhogg, with his sooty scales
    Gnaws at the great Tree’s root, and makes his nest,
    Curled in the knotted maze on which he feeds
    
-R. H. ASH, Ragnarôk III
 
Roland went to Bloomsbury on his bicycle next morning, setting off very early when
Val  was  still  applying  her  workaday  face.  He  went  weaving  perilously  through  and
through  the  stinking  five-mile  worm  of  traffic  across  Putney  Bridge,  along  the
Embankment,  through  Parliament  Square.  He  had  no  office  in  his  old  college,  but
inhabited an office on sufferance, for his few hours’ part-time teaching. Here, in an empty
silence, he unpacked his bicycle panniers and went up to the pantry where the bulk of the
Xerox  squatted  amongst  unsavoury  tea-towels  beside  a  tea-stained  sink.  Whilst  the
machine warmed up, in the dim and hum of the extractor fan, he took out his two letters
and  read  them  again.  Then  he  spread  them  face  down,  to  be  scryed  on  the  black  glass,
under which the rods of green light floated and passed. And the machine spat out, hot and
chemical-scented, spectrograms of those writings, black-rimmed by imaged empty space
as the originals were edged by a century’s dust. He was honest: he wrote his debt in the
departmental  notebook  on  the  draining  board.  Roland  Michell,  2  sheets,  iop.  He  was
dishonest.  He  now  had  a  fair  copy  and  could  slip  the  letters  back  unremarked  into  the
London  Library  Vico.  But  he  did  not  want  to.  He  felt  they  were  his.  He  had  always
slightly despised those enchanted by things touched by the great: Balzac’s ornate walkingstick,  Robert  Louis  Stevenson’s  flageolet,  a  black  lace  mantilla  once  worn  by  George
Eliot.  Mortimer  Cropper  was  in  the  habit  of  drawing  Randolph  Henry  Ash’s  large  gold
watch  from  an  inner  fob  pocket,  and  arranging  his  time  by  Ash’s  timepiece.  Roland’s
Xeroxes  were  cleaner  and  clearer  than  the  faded  coppery-grey  script  of  the  originals;
indeed the copy-ink had a black and gleaming freshness, the machine’s rollers must have
been newly inked. But he wanted the originals.
When  Dr  Williams’s  library  opened  he  presented  himself  and  asked  to  see  the
manuscript of Crabb Robinson’s monumental Diary. He had been there before, but had to
use  Blackadder’s  name,  to  remind  them,  though  he  had  no  idea  of  showing  Blackadder
what he had found, not yet at least, not until his own curiosity was satisfied and the papers
restored.
He  started  reading  in  1856,  the  year  of  publication  oîGods,  Men  and  Heroes,  which
Crabb Robinson, indefatigable, had read and commented on.
 
JUNE 4
Read  several  dramatic  poems  from  Randolph  Ash’s  new  book.  I  noted  particularly
those  purporting  to  be  spoken  by  Augustine  of  Hippo,  the  ninth-century  Saxon  monk,

Gotteschalk, and “Neighbour Pliable” from Pilgrim’s Progress. Also a singular evocation
of Franz Mesmer and the young Mozart playing their glass harmonica at the court of the
Archduke in Vienna, full of sounds and strange airs, excellently conceived and embodied.
This Gotteschalk, a precursor of Luther, even to renouncing his Vows, might be thought in
his intransigent predestinarian vision to figure some of the later Evangelicals of our day,
and  Neighbour  Pliable  perhaps  a  satire  upon  those  like  myself,  who  believe  that
Christianity does not consist in the idolatrous presence of the Deity in a piece of bread, nor
yet in the five points of metaphysic faith. As is his wont, Ash treats Pliable, with whom he
might be supposed to sympathise, with more apparent spleen than he directs towards his
monstrous monk whose ravings have a certain real sublimity. It is difficult to know where
to have Randolph Ash. I fear he will never become a popular poet. His evocation of the
Black  Forest  in  “Gotteschalk”  is  very  fine,  but  how  many  of  the  public  are  prepared  to
endure his theological strictures to come to it? He convolutes and wreathes his melodies
with such a forcing of rhyme and such a thicket of peculiar and ill-founded analogies, that
his meaning is hard to discern. When I read Ash, I think of the younger Coleridge, reciting
with gusto his epigram upon Donne:
With Donne whose muse on dromedary trots
Wreathe iron pokers into true-love knots.
 
This passage was already well known to Ash scholars and had been extensively quoted.
Roland  liked  Crabb  Robinson,  a  man  of  indefatigable  good  will,  intellectual  curiosity,
delight in literature and learning, and yet full of self-deprecation.
“I early found that I had not the literary ability to give me such a place among English
authors  as  I  should  have  desired;  but  I  thought  that  I  had  an  opportunity  of  gaining  a
knowledge of many of the distinguished men of the age, and that I might do some good by
keeping  a  record  of  my  interviews  with  them.”  He  had  known  them  all,  two  whole
generations, Wordsworth, Coleridge, De Quincey, Lamb; Mme de Staël, Goethe, Schiller;
Carlyle,  G.H.  Lewes,  Tennyson,  Clough,  Bagehot.  Roland  read  through  1857  and
embarked on 1858. In the February of that year Robinson wrote:
 
Were  this  my  last  hour  (and  that  of  an  octogenarian  cannot  be  far  of!)  I  would  thank
God for permitting me to behold so much of the excellence conferred on individuals. Of
women, I saw the type of her heroic greatness in Mrs Siddons; of her fascinations, in Mrs
Jordan  and  Mlle  Mars;  I  listened  with  rapture  to  the  dreamy  monologues  of
Coleridge-“that old man eloquent”; I travelled with Wordsworth, the greatest of our lyricophilosophical poets; I relished the wit and pathos of Charles Lamb; I conversed freely with
Goethe  at  his  own  table,  beyond  all  competition  the  supreme  genius  of  his  age  and
country. He acknowledges his obligations only to Shakespeare, Spinoza and Linnaeus, as
Wordsworth,  when  he  resolved  to  be  a  poet,  feared  competition  only  with  Chaucer,
Spenser, Shakespeare and Milton.
 
In June, Roland found what he had been looking for.

 
My breakfast party went off very well indeed, as far as talk was concerned. I had with
me  Bagehot,  Ash,  Mrs  Jameson,  Professor  Spear,  Miss  LaMotte  and  her  friend  Miss
Glover, the last somewhat taciturn. Ash had never met Miss LaMotte, who indeed came
out exceptionally to please me and to speak to her dear Father, whose Mythologies I have
had some hand in bringing before the English public. Discussion of poetry was animated,
especially  of  Dante’s  incomparable  genius,  but  also  of  the  genius  of  Shakespeare  in  his
poems,  especially  the  playfulness  of  his  young  works,  which  Ash  particularly  admires.
Miss  LaMotte  spoke  more  forcefully  than  I  would  have  expected:  she  is  surprisingly
handsome  when  animated.  We  discussed  also  the  so-called  “spiritual”  manifestations,
about which Lady Byron wrote to me with great feeling. There was talk of Mrs Stowe’s
claim to have conversed with the spirit of Charlotte Brontë. Miss Glover, in one of her few
interventions, said warmly that she believed such things could and did happen. Ash said
he  would  require  foolproof  experimental  conviction  and  did  not  imagine  it  would  be
forthcoming.  Bagehot  said  that  Ash’s  presentation  of  Mesmer’s  belief  in  spiritual
influences  showed  he  was  less  rigorously  confined  by  positive  science  than  he  now
claimed to be. Ash replied that the historical imagination required a kind of poetic belief
in the mental universe of his characters and that this was so strong with him, that he was in
danger  of  having  no  beliefs  of  his  own  at  all.  All  appealed  to  Miss  LaMotte  on  the
question of the rapping spirits; she declined to express an opinion, answering only with a
Monna Lisa smile.
 
Roland copied out this passage and read on, but could find no further reference to Miss
LaMotte, though Ash was a fairly frequent host and guest. Robinson paid tribute to Mrs
Ash’s  excellent  housekeeping,  and  lamented  that  she  had  never  become  the  Mother  she
was ideally suited to be. He did not appear to have noticed any extraordinary knowledge
of  Ash’s  poetry  in  either  Miss  LaMotte  or  Miss  Glover.  Perhaps  the  conversation,
“pleasant and unexpected” or alternatively “extraordinary,” had taken place elsewhere or
on  another  occasion.  Crabb  Robinson’s  records  looked  odd  transcribed  in  Roland’s  own
rather cramped script, less confident, less homogeneously part of a life. Roland knew that
statistically  he  was  almost  bound  to  have  corrupted  this  text  in  some  way,  if  only  by
inadequate  transcription.  Mortimer  Cropper’s  graduate  students  were  made  to  transcribe
passages-usually from Randolph Henry Ash-transcribe again their own transcriptions, type
them  up,  and  then  scan  them  for  errors  with  a  severe  editorial  eye.  There  was  never  an
error-free  text,  Cropper  said.  He  kept  up  this  humbling  exercise,  even  in  the  days  of
effortless  photocopying.  There  was  no  such  professional  method  about  Blackadder,  who
nevertheless noticed and corrected a plethora of errors, accompanying this correction with
a steady series of disparaging comments on the declining standard of English education. In
his day, he said, students were grounded in spelling and had learned poetry and the Bible
by heart. An odd phrase, “by heart,” he would add, as though poems were stored in the
bloodstream.  ”  ‘Felt  along  the  heart,’  as  Wordsworth  said,”  Blackadder  said.  But  in  the
best  English  tradition  he  did  not  consider  it  his  business  to  equip  his  deficient  students
with tools they had not got. They must muddle through in a fog of grumble and contempt.
Roland went to the British Museum in search of Blackadder. He had not made up his
mind what to say to him, so spent time establishing a position in the Reading Room, under

the high dome, which, however high, held, he felt, insufficient oxygen for all the diligent
readers, so that they lay somnolent like flames dying in Humphry Davy’s bell-jar as their
sustenance  was  consumed.  It  was  afternoon-the  morning  had  gone  on  Crabb  Robinsonwhich meant that all the ample, high, soft-blue leather desks along the spokes of the great
wheel  that  radiated  from  the  Superintendent’s  desk,  ensphered  by  the  Catalogue,  were
taken, and he had to be content with one of the minimal flat triangular ends of the latecome segments inserted between these spokes. These inserts were ghost-desks, secondary
desks, stammering desks, DD GG OO. He found a place at the end of AA (for Ash) near
the  door.  In  his  first  pleasure  at  being  admitted  to  this  inner  circle  of  learning  he  had
compared  it  to  Dante’s  Paradiso,  in  which  the  saints  and  patriarchs  and  virgins  sat  in
orderly ranks in a circular formation, a huge rose, and also the leaves of a huge volume,
once  scattered  through  the  universe,  now  gathered.  The  gilt  lettering  on  the  soft-blue
leather added to the mediaeval imagining.
In which case, the Ash factory, hutched in the bowels of the building, was the Inferno.
There was a way down, on iron rungs, from the Reading Room, and a way out, through a
high locked portal, which brought you up into the sunless Egyptian necropolis, amongst
blind staring pharaohs, crouching scribes, minor sphinxes and empty mummy-cases. The
Ash  factory  was  a  hot  place  of  metal  cabinets  and  glass  cells  containing  the  clatter  of
typewriters,  gloomily  lit  by  neon  tubes.  Micro-readers  glowed  green  in  its  gloom.  It
smelled occasionally sulphurous, when the photocopiers short-circuited. It was even beset
by wailings and odd shrieks. The whole of the lower regions of the British Museum reeks
of tom-cat. The creatures work their way in through gratings and air bricks, prowl and are
harried and occasionally stealthily fed.
Blackadder sat amongst the apparent chaos and actual order of his great edition, sifting
a  drift  of  small  paper  slips  in  a  valley  between  cliffs  of  furred-edged  index  cards  and
bulging  mottled  files.  Behind  him  flitted  his  clerical  assistant,  pale  Paola,  her  long
colourless  hair  bound  in  a  rubber  band,  her  huge  glasses  mothlike,  her  finger-tips  dusty
grey  pads.  In  an  inner  room,  beyond  the  typewriter  cubicle,  was  a  small  cavern
constructed  of  filing  cabinets,  inhabited  by  Dr  Beatrice  Nest,  almost  bricked  in  by  the
boxes containing the diary and correspondence of Ellen Ash.
Blackadder was fifty-four and had come to editing Ash out of pique. He was the son
and  grandson  of  Scottish  schoolmasters.  His  grandfather  recited  poetry  on  firelight
evenings: Marmion, Childe Harold, Ragnarôk. His father sent him to Downing College in
Cambridge to study under F. R. Leavis. Leavis did to Blackadder what he did to serious
students: he showed him the terrible, the magnificent importance and urgency of English
literature  and  simultaneously  deprived  him  of  any  confidence  in  his  own  capacity  to
contribute  to  or  change  it.  The  young  Blackadder  wrote  poems,  imagined  Dr  Leavis’s
comments  on  them,  and  burned  them.  He  devised  an  essay  style  of  Spartan  brevity,
equivocation  and  impenetrability.  His  fate  was  decided  by  a  seminar  on  dating.  The
Cambridge  room  was  crowded,  the  floor  full,  the  chair-arms  perched  on.  The  lean  and
agile don, in his open-necked shirt, stood on the window-sill and tugged at the casement to
let in fresh air, cold Cambridge light. The dating handout contained a troubadour lyric, a
piece  of  dramatic  Jacobean  verse,  some  satirical  couplets,  a  blank  verse  meditation  on
volcanic  mud  and  a  love-sonnet.  Blackadder,  schooled  by  his  grandfather,  saw
immediately  that  all  these  poems  were  by  Randolph  Henry  Ash,  examples  of  his

ventriloquism, of his unwieldy range. He himself had two choices: to state his knowledge,
or to allow the seminar to proceed, with Leavis enticing unfortunate undergraduates into
making  wrong  identifications,  and  then  proceeding  to  demonstrate  his  own  analytic
brilliance in distinguishing fake from authenticity, Victorian alienation from the voice of
true  feeling.  Blackadder  chose  silence,  and  Ash  was  duly  exposed  and  found  wanting.
Blackadder  felt  that  he  had  somehow  betrayed  Randolph  Henry  Ash,  though  he  might
more  justly  have  been  thought  to  have  betrayed  himself,  his  grandfather,  or  possibly  Dr
Leavis.  He  compensated.  He  wrote  his  PhD  on  Conscious  Argument  and  Unconscious
Bias: A Source of Tension in the Dramatic Poems of Randolph HenryAsh. He became an
expert  on  Ash  in  Ash’s  most  unfashionable  days.  He  had  been  talked  into  editing  the
Complete Poems and Plays as early as 1959, with the blessing of the present Lord Ash, an
elderly Methodist peer who was a descendant of a remote cousin of Ash himself and heir
to the ownership of the unsold manuscripts. He had in those days of innocence seen the
Edition as a finite task that would lead on to other things.
He  had  research  assistants,  in  fluctuating  numbers,  whom  he  despatched  like  Noah’s
doves  and  ravens  into  the  libraries  of  the  world,  clutching  numbered  slips  of  paper,  like
cloakroom tickets or luncheon vouchers, each containing a query, a half-line of possible
quotation,  a  proper  name  to  be  located.  The  hub  of  a  Roman  chariot,  tracked  through
Gibbon’s  footnotes.  “The  dangerous  dreamed  melon  of  the  sage”  which  turned  out  to
come  from  the  dream  of  Descartes.  Ash  had  been  interested  in  everything.  Arab
astronomy  and  African  transport  systems,  angels  and  oak  apples,  hydraulics  and  the
guillotine,  druids,  and  the  grande  armée,  catharists  and  printer’s  devils,  ectoplasm  and
solar  mythology,  the  last  meals  of  frozen  mastodons  and  the  true  nature  of  manna.  The
footnotes engulfed and swallowed the text. They were ugly and ungainly, but necessary,
Blackadder  thought,  as  they  sprang  up  like  the  heads  of  the  Hydra,  two  to  solve  in  the
place of one solved.
He thought often, in his dim place, of how a man becomes his job. What would he be
now  if  he  had  become,  say,  a  civil  servant  allotting  housing  finance,  or  a  policeman,
poring  over  bits  of  hair  and  skin  and  thumbball  prints?  (This  was  a  very  Ash-like
speculation.) What would knowledge be, collected for its own sake, for his own sake, that
was,  for  James  Blackadder,  with  no  reference  to  the  pickings,  digestion  and  leavings  of
Randolph Henry Ash?
There were times when Blackadder allowed himself to see clearly that he would end his
working life, that was to say his conscious thinking life, in this task, that all his thoughts
would have been another man’s thoughts, all his work another man’s work. And then he
thought  it  did  not  perhaps  matter  so  greatly.  He  did  after  all  find  Ash  fascinating,  even
after all these years. It was a pleasant subordination, if he was a subordinate. He believed
Mortimer Cropper thought himself the lord and owner of Ash, but he, Blackadder, knew
his place better.
He had once seen a naturalist on the television who seemed to him to be an analogue of
himself. This man went out with a pouch and gathered up owl-pellets, which he labelled,
and  later,  took  apart  with  forceps,  bathed  in  glass  beakers  of  various  cleansing  fluids,
ordering and rearranging the orts and fragments of the owl’s compressed package of bone,
tooth and fur, in order to reconstitute the dead shrew or slow-worm that had run, died, and

made  its  way  through  owl-gut.  He  was  pleased  with  this  image  and  momentarily
considered making a poem out of it. Then he discovered Ash had been beforehand with
him. He had described an archaeologist:
 
    Finding out ancient battles from the shards
    Of shattered blades or mashed and splintered bones,
    Or broken brain-pans, as the curate reads
    The death of vole or slow-worm in the dried
    Packets the tidy owl ejects, cast out
    By white death floating by on softest sails
    The bloody hook curved in the downy ruff…
 
Then Blackadder could not think whether he had noticed the screen naturalist because
his mind was primed with Ash’s image, or whether it had worked independently.
Roland  emerged  from  tunnels  of  shelving  into  Blackadder’s  icily  lit  domain.  Paola
smiled at him and Blackadder frowned. Blackadder was a grey man, with a grey skin and
iron-grey hair, which he wore rather long, because he was proud that it was still so thick.
His  clothes,  tweed  jacket,  cord  trousers,  were  respectable,  well-worn  and  dusty,  like
everything else down there. He had a good ironic smile when he smiled, which was very
infrequently.
Roland said, “I think I’ve made a discovery.”
“It will probably turn out to have been discovered twenty times already. What is it?”
“I went to read his Vico and it’s still crammed with his manuscript notes, bursting with
them, between every page. In the London Library.”
“Cropper will have been through it with a toothcomb.”
“I don’t think so. I truly don’t think so. All the dust is set in black rims, it reaches the
edges  of  the  paper.  No  one’s  touched  it  for  a  long,  long  time.  I  guess  not  ever.  I  read
some.”
“Useful?”
“Oh, very. Enormously.”
Blackadder,  reluctant  to  show  excitement,  began  to  clip  together  bits  of  paper.  “I’d
better  have  a  look,”  he  said.  “I’d  better  see  for  myself.  I’ll  get  over  there.  You  didn’t
disturb anything?”
“Oh no. Oh no. That is, a lot of the papers simply flew out when the book was opened,
but we put them back in place, I think.”
“I  don’t  understand  it.  I  thought  Cropper  was  ubiquitous.  You’d  better  keep  this
absolutely hush-hush, you understand, or it’ll all be winging its way across the Atlantic,

whilst the London Library replaces its carpets and installs a coffee machine and Cropper
sends  us  another  of  his  nice  helpful  smiley-regretful  faxes,  offering  access  to  the  Stant
Collection  and  every  possible  assistance  with  microfilm.  You  haven’t  said  anything  to
anyone?”
“Only the Librarian.”
“I’ll get over there. Patriotism will have to do instead of funding. Stop the drain.”
“They wouldn’t-”
“I  wouldn’t  trust  anyone,  faced  with  Cropper’s  cheque-book,  not  further  than  I  could
see.”
Blackadder was struggling into his overcoat, a shabby British Warm. Roland had given
up  all  thought,  in  any  case  not  very  realistic,  of  discussing  the  purloined  letters  with
Blackadder.  He  did,  however,  ask,  “Can  you  tell  me  anything  about  a  writer  called
LaMotte?”
“Isidore  LaMotte.  Mythologies,  1832.  Mythologiesindigènes  de  la  Bretagne  et  de  la
Grande Bretagne. Also Mythologiesfrançaises. A great scholarly compendium of folklore
and legends. Suffused by a kind of fashionable search for the Key to All Mythologies but
also with Breton national identity and culture. Ash would almost certainly have read them,
but I’ve no recollection of any precise use he made of them…”
“There was a Miss LaMotte…”
“Oh,  the  daughter.  She  wrote  religious  poems,  didn’t  she?  A  gloomy  little  booklet
called Last Things. And children’s stories. Tales Told in November. Things that go bump in
the night. And an epic which they say is unreadable.”
“I think the feminists are interested in her,” said Paola.
“They would be,” said Blackadder. “They haven’t any time for Randolph Ash. All they
want  is  to  read  Ellen’s  endless  journal  once  our  friend  in  there  has  actually  managed  to
bring it to the light of day. They think Randolph Ash suppressed Ellen’s writing and fed
off her imagination. They’d have a hard time proving that, I think, if they were interested
in proof, which I’m not sure they are. They know what there is to find before they’ve seen
it.  All  they’ve  got  to  go  on  is  that  she  spent  a  lot  of  time  lying  on  the  sofa,  and  that’s
hardly  unusual  for  a  lady  in  her  time  and  circumstances.  Their  real  problem-and
Beatrice’s-is  that  Ellen  Ash  is dull.  No  Jane  Carlyle,  more’s  the  pity.  Poor  old  Beatrice
began  by  wanting  to  show  how  self-denying  and  supportive  Ellen  Ash  was  and  she
messed around looking up every recipe for gooseberry jam and every jaunt to Broadstairs
for  twenty-five  years,  can  you  believe  it,  and  woke  up  to  find  that  no  one  wanted  selfdenial  and  dedication  any  more,  they  wanted  proof  that  Ellen  was  raging  with  rebellion
and pain and untapped talent. Poor Beatrice. One publication to her name, and a slim book
called Helpmeets  without  irony  doesn’t  go  down  well  with  today’s  feminists.  One  little
anthology in 1950 of wise, witty and tender sayings from the female companions of the
great.  D.  Wordsworth,  J.  Carlyle,  E.  Tennyson,  Ellen  Ash.  But  the  Women’s  Studies
people can’t get their hands on all that stuff to publish as long as poor old Bea is still the
official editor. She doesn’t know what’s hit her.”

Roland did not want to hear another long speech from Blackadder about Beatrice Nest’s
long-delayed  edition  of  Ellen  Ash.  There  was  a  note  that  came  into  Blackadder’s  voice
when he got onto the subject of Beatrice, a jarring, snarling note, that put Roland in mind
of hounds baying. (He had never heard hounds baying except on the television.) The idea
of Cropper produced a furtive, conspiratorial look in the scholar.
Roland did not offer to accompany Blackadder to the London Library. He went off to
look  for  coffee.  After  that  he  could  pursue  Miss  LaMotte,  who  now  had  an  identity  of
sorts, through the Catalogue, like any other dead soul.
He emerged amongst the Egyptian heavyweights and saw, between two huge stone legs,
something rapid and white and golden that turned out to be Fergus Wolff, also heading for
coffee. Fergus was very tall, with brassy hair cut long on top and short at the back, in the
1980s version of the 1930s, over a dazzling white heavy sweater and loose black trousers
like a Japanese martial artist. He smiled at Roland, a pleased, voracious smile, with bright
blue eyes and a long mouth terribly full of strong white teeth. He was older than Roland, a
child  of  the  Sixties  who  had  temporarily  dropped  out,  opted  for  freedom  and  Parisian
revolutions,  sitting  at  the  feet  of  Barthes  and  Foucault,  before  coming  back  to  dazzle
Prince Albert College. He was pleasant enough in general, though most people who met
him  formed  the  vaguest  of  ideas  that  he  might  be  dangerous  in  some  unspecified  way.
Roland liked Fergus because Fergus seemed to like him.
Fergus  was  writing  a  deconstructive  account  of  Balzac’s  Chef-d’Oeuvre  Inconnu.
Roland had ceased to be surprised that an English Department was sponsoring the study of
French books. There seemed to be nothing else nowadays, and in any case Roland did not
want to be thought insular. His own French, owing to his mother’s passionate interference
with  his  education,  was  good.  Fergus  sprawled  in  the  cafeteria  banquette  and  said  the
challenge was to deconstruct something that had apparently already deconstructed itself,
since  the  book  was  about  a  painting  that  turned  out  to  be  nothing  but  a  chaotic  mass  of
brush-strokes.  Roland  listened  politely  and  said,  “Do  you  know  anything  about  a  Miss
LaMotte who wrote children’s stories and religious poetry in the 1850s or thereabouts?”
Fergus laughed rather a long time at this, and said tersely, “I should.”
“Who was she?”
“Christabel LaMotte. Daughter of Isidore, the mythographer. Last Things. Tales Told in
November.  An  epic  called  The  Fairy  Melusina.  Very  bizarre.  Do  you  know  about
Melusina? She was a fairy who married a mortal to gain a soul, and made a pact that he
would never spy on her on Saturdays, and for years he never did, and they had six sons, all
with  strange  defects-odd  ears,  giant  tusks,  a  catshead  growing  out  of  one  cheek,  three
eyes,  that  sort  of  thing.  One  was  called  Geoffroy  à  la  Grande  Dent  and  one  was  called
Horrible. She built castles, real ones that still exist, in Poitou. And in the end, of course, he
looked through the keyhole-or made one in her steel door with his sword-point according
to one version- and there she was in a great marble bath disporting herself. And from the
waist  down  she  was  a  fish  or  a  serpent,  Rabelais  says  an  “andouille,”  a  kind  of  huge
sausage, the symbolism is obvious, and she beat the water with her muscular tail. And he
said  nothing  and  she  did  nothing  until  Geoffroy,  the  tough  son,  took  exception  to  his
brother Fromont taking refuge in a monastery, and when he wouldn’t come out, he piled

up brushwood and burned the whole thing down, monks and Fromont and all. And when
this was reported, Raimondin (he was the original knight, the husband) said, “This is all
your fault, I should never have married a horrible snake.” And then she reproached him
and turned into a dragon, and flew away round the battlements making a terrible noise and
battering  the  stones.  Oh,  before  that  she  gave  him  strict  injunctions  to  be  sure  to  kill
Horrible or he would destroy them all, which was duly done. And she comes back to the
Counts of Lusignan to foretell deaths-she is a kind of Dame Blanche, or Fata Bianca.
“There  are  all  sorts  of  symbolic  and  mythological  and  psychoanalytic  interpretations,
you  can  imagine.  Christabel  LaMotte  wrote  this  long  and  very  convoluted  poem  about
Melusina’s story in the 1860s and it was published at the beginning of the 1870s. It’s an
odd affair-tragedy and romance and symbolism rampant all over it, a kind of dream-world
full of strange beasts and hidden meanings and a really weird sexuality or sensuality. The
feminists  are  crazy  about  it.  They  say  it  expresses  women’s  impotent  desire.  It  wasn’t
much read until they rediscovered it-Virginia Woolf knew it, she adduced it as an image of
the  essential  androgyny  of  the  creative  mind-but  the  new  feminists  see  Melusina  in  her
bath as a symbol of self-sufficient female sexuality needing no poor males. I like it, it’s
disturbing.  It  keeps  changing  focus.  From  very  precise  description  of  the  scaly  tail  to
cosmic battles.”
“That’s very useful. I’ll look it up.”
“Why do you want to know?”
“I came across a reference in Randolph Ash. There’s a reference to almost everything in
Randolph Ash, sooner or later. Why did I make you laugh?”
“I  became  an  involuntary  expert  on  Christabel  LaMotte.  There  are  two  people  in  the
world  who  know  all  that  is  known  about  Christabel  LaMotte.  One  is  Professor  Leonora
Stern, in Tallahassee. And the other is Dr Maud Bailey in Lincoln University. I met them
both at that Paris conference on sexuality and textuality I went to. If you remember. I don’t
think they like men. Nevertheless I had a brief affair with the redoubtable Maud. In Paris
and then here.”
He stopped and frowned to himself. He opened his mouth to say more and then closed
it again. He said after a time, “She-Maud- runs a Women’s Resource Centre in Lincoln.
They’ve got quite a lot of Christabel’s unpublished papers there. If you want anything out
of the way, there’s where to look.”
“I might. Thanks. What is she like? Will she eat me?”
“She thicks men’s blood with cold,” said Fergus with a lot of undecodable feeling.